
## Docker-Interview:  

### What is Docker ?
  
Docker is a open source platform used to automate the deployment of applications,within the lightweight and portable containers.
These containers package software and all its dependencies into standardized units, allowing applications to run consistently across different environments.

### Difference b/w container and virtual machine ?

1.Container is a lightweight.

2.Isolated environment that runs on a shared os kernel.

3.It allows faster startup times and reduced resource overhead compared to VM's.

1.VM, on the other hand, emulate an entire physical computer.

2.Includes its own operating system.

3.The resources are required more to run.

### What is a docker image ?

A Docker image is a read-only template used to create docker containers.
It contains everything needed to run a software application, including code, runtime, libraries, and dependencies.
Images are built using a Dockerfile and can be stored in the Docker registries like Docker hub.

### Explain the role of a Dockerfile ?

A Dockerfile is a text file that contains instructions for building a Docker image.
It specifies the base image, commands to install dependencies, configure settings, and define how application should run inside the container.
Dockerfiles are used with docker build command to create custom Docker images.

### What is docker-compose and how it is used ?

1.Docker-compose is a tool used to define and run multi-container Docker applications.

2.It uses a YAML file to specify services, networks and volumes for an application, allowing developers to define and manage complex application environments with ease.

### Explain the concept of Docker swarm ?

1.Docker swarm is a container orchestration tool built into Docker engine.

2.It allows users to create and manage a cluster of Docker hosts, called nodes, to deploy and scale containerised applications across multiple machines.

Docker swarm provides features for service discovery, load balancing and high availability.

### What is the difference b/w Docker swarm and k8s ?

1.Docker swarm is a simpler, built tool provided by Docker, while k8s is a more feature-rich, standalone container orchestration platform.

2.k8s offers advanced capabilities for scaling, self-healing and managing containerized applications at scale, making it suitable for complex, production-grade environments.

### How do you share data b/w Docker containers ?

1.Docker containers can share data using volumes or bind mounts.

2.Volumes are managed by Docker and Persist data even if the container is stopped or removed.

3.Build mounts link a directory on the host machine to a directory in the container, allowing for direct access to host files.

### What is Docker hub & How is it used ?

1.Docker hub is a cloud based repository for storing and sharing Docker images.

2.It provides a centralised location for developers to find, distribute and collaborate on Docker images.

3.Docker hub also features like automated builds, image versioning and integration with CI/CD pipelines.

### Explain the concept of Docker networking ?

1.Docker networking allows containers to communicate with each other and external networks.

2.Docker provides various network drivers including bridge network, host n/w, overlay n/w and macvlan n/w to faciliate communication b/w containers and connect containers to different n/w environments.

### What is Docker swarm mode,how do you initilaize a swarm ?

1.Docker swarm mode enables native clustering and orchestration features in Docker engine.

2.To initialize a swarm, we use the command on a manager node.

```
docker swarm init
```

3.This command generates a token that other noder nodes can use to join the swarm as worker / manager nodes.

### Explain the purpose of Docker volumes ?

1.Docker volumes provide a way to persist the data that are generated by and used by the containers.

2.They allow data to be shared and stored independently of container lifecycle, ensuring data persists even if the container is removed or replaced.

3.Volumes are also used to share the data b/w the containers.

### How do you monitor Docker conatiner and services ?

1.Docker provides several built-in monitoring tools and integartion options for monitoirng containers and services.

2.These include Docker stats for real-time container resource usage, Docker evenrs for monitoring container life cycle events and third party monitoring solutions that integrate with Docker API.

### What are Docker labels and how are they used ?

1.Docker labels are key-value pairs that can be attached to Docker objects like containers, images, volumes and n/w.

2.They provide metadata about these objects, allowing for easier organization, management and identification.

3.Labels can be used for filtering, querying and automating Docker operations.

### Explain the cocept of Docker security ?

1.Docker provides several built-in security features to protect containers and Docker environment.

2.These include container isolation through namespaces and control groups, image scanning for vulnerabilities, access control using Docker content trust, and runtime security options like SElinux and APPArmor.




